[DPE-6495] - docs: add CC tutorial (#312)
canonical/kafka-operator: docs/tutorial/t-reassign-partitions.md

This is part of the Charmed Apache Kafka Tutorial. Please refer to the [overview page](/t/charmed-apache-kafka-documentation-tutorial-overview/10571) for more information and the overview of the content.

## Partition rebalancing and reassignment

> By default, when scaling-out a Apache Kafka cluster, partitions allocated to the original brokers are not reallocated to make use of any new storage volumes and brokers, which can result in over-provisioning of resources. The inverse is also true when scaling-in, which can result in under-replicated partitions at best, and permanent data loss at worst.

Author: Generally scaling-UP means vertical scaling and provisioning more physical resources.
Scaling-OUT means horizontal scaling, adding more workers.

I am aware that we generally mix-up the terms, but for documentation I want to be specific. Will apply the other suggestions though!

At a high level, Cruise Control is made up of the following five components:

- **Workload Monitor** - responsible for the metrics collection from Apache Kafka
- **Analyzer** - generates allocation proposals based on configured [Goals](https://github.com/linkedin/cruise-control?tab=readme-ov-file#goals)
- **Anomaly Detector** - detects failures in brokers, disks, metrics or goals and (optionally) self-heals
- **Webserver** - a REST API for user operations
- **Executor** - issues re-allocation commands to Apache Kafka

### Deploying partition balancer

The Charmed Apache Kafka charm has a configuration option `roles`, which takes a list of possible values.
Different roles can be configured to run on the same machine, or as separate Juju applications.

The two necessary roles for cluster rebalancing are:
- `broker` - running Apache Kafka
- `balancer` - running Cruise Control

> **Note**: It is recommended to deploy a separate Juju application for running Cruise Control in production environments.

For the purposes of this tutorial, we will be deploying a single Charmed Apache Kafka unit to serve as the `balancer`:

> ```shell

Reviewer: **Suggestion**:
We use both `shell` and `bash` in this document for general CLI commands. Can we stay consistent, preferably with `bash`?

juju deploy kafka --config roles=balancer -n 1 cruise-control
```

Earlier in the tutorial, we covered enabling TLS encryption, so we will repeat that step here for the new `cruise-control` application:

```shell

> juju integrate cruise-control:certificates self-signed-certificates

Author: CC uses the Kafka charm as it's base, and Kafka supports multiple `certificates` interfaces, specifically `certificates`, `trusted-ca` and `trusted-certificate`. When you relate without specifying the interface, Juju complains.
We don't need to specify on the provider side though.

```

> Now, to make the new `cruise-control` application aware of the existing Apache Kafka cluster, we will integrate the two applications using the `peer_cluster` relation interface, ensuring that the `broker` cluster is using the `peer-cluster` relation-endpoint, and the `balancer` cluster is using the `peer-cluster-orchestrator` relation-endpoint:

Author: Very good point! It follows [the Opensearch multi-cluster spec](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1WY0Pqy2iHb4tKzUL9rjfWPaDCXGbRurD93et_T9Oayg/edit?tab=t.0#heading=h.a9ras5is1vxe), so I don't think it's reasonable to remove the `peer-cluster` name. Plus it's fairly confusing generally, as the same charm needs to support both sides of the same relation.

I also agree that it's confusing that we have 'relation interfaces' and 'relation endpoints', we can blame Juju for that one

```shell
juju add-unit kafka 4
```

We can see that, by default, no partitions are allocated by checking the log directory assignment for the new unit `3`:

```bash
juju ssh kafka/leader sudo -i \
    'charmed-kafka.log-dirs' \
    '--describe' \
    '--bootstrap-server localhost:9093' \
    '--command-config /var/snap/charmed-kafka/current/etc/kafka/client.properties' \
    | tail -n +3 | jq -c '.brokers[] | select(.broker == 3)' | jq
```

This should produce output similar to the result seen below, with no partitions allocated by default:

```json
{
  "broker": 3,
  "logDirs": [
    {
      "error": null,
      "logDir": "/var/snap/charmed-kafka/common/var/lib/kafka/data",
      "partitions": []
    }
  ]
}
```

Now, to rebalance some existing partitions from brokers `0`, `1` and `2`, let's allocate them to broker `3`:

```shell
juju run cruise-control/0 rebalance mode=add brokerid=3 --wait=2m
```

> > **NOTE** - If this action fails with a message similar to `Cruise Control balancer service has not yet collected enough data to provide a partition reallocation proposal`, wait 20 minutes or so and try again. Cruise Control takes a while to collect sufficient metrics from the Apache Kafka cluster during a cold deployment

Reviewer: **Suggestion**: Let's be consistent with this makeshift/workaround notes.
```suggestion
> **Note**: If this action fails with a message similar to `Cruise Control balancer service has not yet collected enough data to provide a partition reallocation proposal`, wait 20 minutes or so and try again. Cruise Control takes a while to collect sufficient metrics from an Apache Kafka cluster during a cold deployment.
```

Author: Do you like the 'icons' we can get with markdown notes? 
![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/93341fd4-9263-49df-ba85-20e131229f19)

Reviewer: Of course, I do like them. The way we do notes now (with the quotes syntax) is a **workaround** for the Discourse now have a bug preventing us from using proper admonitions (Note) blocks. The existing notes are working fine until we try to edit a page with them. I hope IS will figure it out eventually, and we will get back to standardised Note blocks implemented by a Discourse plugin.

And Markdown doesn't have a [standard syntax](https://www.markdownguide.org/basic-syntax/) for admonitions (notes). The image above looks like a GitHub custom implementation. The problem with custom implementations is compatibility. And since we have three different platforms building this markdown into a website (Discourse, Charmhub, Canonical.com website), we should stick to what works in all of them.

> By default, the `rebalance` action runs as a 'dryrun', where the returned result is what **would** happen were the partition rebalance actually executed. In the action result, one can find some rich information on the proposed allocation. 

Reviewer: **Suggestion**:
```suggestion
By default, the `rebalance` action runs as a "dryrun", where the returned result is what **would** happen were the partition rebalance actually executed. The action output has detailed information on the proposed allocation. 
```

For example, the **summary** section might look similar to this:

```yaml
summary:
  datatomovemb: "0"
  excludedbrokersforleadership: '[]'
  excludedbrokersforreplicamove: '[]'
  excludedtopics: '[]'
  intrabrokerdatatomovemb: "0"
  monitoredpartitionspercentage: "100.0"
  numintrabrokerreplicamovements: "0"
  numleadermovements: "0"
  numreplicamovements: "76"
  ondemandbalancednessscoreafter: "78.8683072916115"
  ondemandbalancednessscorebefore: "68.01755475998335"
  provisionrecommendation: ""
  provisionstatus: RIGHT_SIZED
  recentwindows: "1"
```

If we are happy with this proposal, we can re-run the action, but this time instructing the charm to actually execute the proposal:

```shell
juju run cruise-control/0 rebalance mode=add dryrun=false brokerid=3 --wait=10m
```

> Partition rebalances can take quite some time. To monitor the progress, in a separate terminal session, you can check the Juju debug logs to see it in progress:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Partition rebalances can take quite some time. To monitor the progress, in a separate terminal session, check the Juju debug logs to see it in progress:
```

```
unit-cruise-control-0: 22:18:41 INFO unit.cruise-control/0.juju-log Waiting for task execution to finish for user_task_id='d3e426a3-6c2e-412e-804c-8a677f2678af'...
unit-cruise-control-0: 22:18:51 INFO unit.cruise-control/0.juju-log Waiting for task execution to finish for user_task_id='d3e426a3-6c2e-412e-804c-8a677f2678af'...
unit-cruise-control-0: 22:19:02 INFO unit.cruise-control/0.juju-log Waiting for task execution to finish for user_task_id='d3e426a3-6c2e-412e-804c-8a677f2678af'...
unit-cruise-control-0: 22:19:12 INFO unit.cruise-control/0.juju-log Waiting for task execution to finish for user_task_id='d3e426a3-6c2e-412e-804c-8a677f2678af'...
...
```

> Once it has been completed, and the action has returned a result, you can now verify the partition movement using the same commands as before:

Reviewer: **Suggestion**:
```suggestion
Once the action is complete, verify the partitions using the same commands as before:
```

```bash
juju ssh kafka/leader sudo -i \
    'charmed-kafka.log-dirs' \
    '--describe' \
    '--bootstrap-server localhost:9093' \
    '--command-config /var/snap/charmed-kafka/current/etc/kafka/client.properties' \
    | tail -n +3 | jq -c '.brokers[] | select(.broker == 3)' | jq
```

This should produce an output similar to the result seen below, with broker `3` now having assigned partitions present, completing the adding of a new broker to the cluster:

```json
{
  "broker": 3,
  "logDirs": [
    {
      "partitions": [
        {
          "partition": "__KafkaCruise ControlModelTrainingSamples-10",
          "size": 0,
          "offsetLag": 0,
          "isFuture": false
        },
        ...
```

### Removing old brokers

> Following on from the previous example of `Adding new brokers`, let's proceed to safely remove the new broker unit. Before scaling down the Juju application, we must make sure to carefully move any existing data from units about to be removed, to another unit.

Reviewer: **Suggestion**:
```suggestion
To safely scale down an Apache Kafka cluster, we must make sure to carefully move any existing data from units about to be removed, to another unit that will stay.
```

In practice, this means running a `rebalance` Juju action as seen above, **BEFORE** scaling down the application. This ensures that data is moved, prior to the unit becoming unreachable and permanently losing the data on it.

> > **NOTE**: As partition data is replicated across a finite number of units based on the value of the Apache Kafka cluster's `replication.factor` property (default value is `3`), it is imperative to remove only one broker at a time, so as to avoid losing all available replicas for a given partition.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> **Note**: As partition data is replicated across a finite number of units based on the value of the Apache Kafka cluster's `replication.factor` property (default value is `3`), it is imperative to remove only one broker at a time, to avoid losing all available replicas for a given partition.
```

> To remove the most recent broker unit `3` from the previous example, re-run the action with a new parameter value of `mode=remove`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To remove the most recent broker unit `3` from the previous example, re-run the `rebalance` action with `mode=remove`:
```

```shell
juju run cruise-control/0 rebalance mode=remove dryrun=false brokerid=3 --wait=10m
```

This does not remove the unit, but moves the partitions from the broker on unit number `3` to other brokers within the cluster.

> Once the action has been completed, we can verify that broker `3` no longer has any assigned partitions by doing the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once the action has been completed, verify that broker `3` no longer has any assigned partitions:
```

```bash
juju ssh kafka/leader sudo -i \
    'charmed-kafka.log-dirs' \
    '--describe' \
    '--bootstrap-server localhost:9093' \
    '--command-config /var/snap/charmed-kafka/current/etc/kafka/client.properties' \
    | tail -n +3 | jq -c '.brokers[] | select(.broker == 3)' | jq
```

> This should result something similar to the result seen below, with broker `3` now having no partitions assigned, completing the safe reassignment of a broker's data to other brokers in the cluster

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Make sure that broker `3` now have no partitions assigned, for example:
```

```json
{
  "broker": 3,
  "logDirs": [
    {
      "partitions": [],
      "error": null,
      "logDir": "/var/lib/kafka/data"
    }
  ]
}
```

> Now, it is safe to scale-in the cluster, removing broker number `3`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, it is safe to scale down the cluster, removing the broker number `3` completely:
```

```shell
juju remove-unit kafka/3
```

### Full cluster rebalancing

> If a cluster has been running in production for some time, partition allocations may be imbalanced. This can happen naturally as topic load varies, topics are reconfigured to have more/less partitions, or new topics are added/removed etc. As such, it is expected that periodically during the lifetime of a deployment, an administrator will need to redistribute the partition allocation across the existing broker units as part of cluster maintenance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Over time, an Apache Kafka cluster in production may develop an imbalance in partitions allocation. This can occur naturally as topic load fluctuates, partitions are added or removed due to reconfiguration, or new topics are created or deleted. Therefore, as part of regular cluster maintenance, administrators should periodically redistribute partitions across existing broker units to ensure optimal performance.
```

> Unlike `Adding new brokers` or `Removing old brokers`, this includes a full re-shuffle of partition allocation across all currently live broker units.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Unlike `Adding new brokers` or `Removing old brokers`, this includes a full re-shuffle of partitions allocation across all currently live broker units.
```

> To achieve this, re-run the action with a new parameter value of `mode=full`. Let's try it with a `dryrun` (by default) for now:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To achieve this, re-run the `rebalance` action with the `mode=full`. You can do it in the "dryrun" mode (by default) for now:
```

```shell
juju run cruise-control/0 rebalance mode=full --wait=10m
```

> Looking at the bottom of the output, we can see the value of the `balancedness` score before and after the proposed 'full' rebalance:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Looking at the bottom of the output, see the value of the `balancedness` score before and after the proposed 'full' rebalance:
```

```
summary:
  ...
  ondemandbalancednessscoreafter: "90.06926434109423"
  ondemandbalancednessscorebefore: "85.15942156660185"
  ...
```

> To implement the proposed changes, run:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To implement the proposed changes, run the same command but with `dryrun=false`:
```

To address this, we can make use of [LinkedIn's Cruise Control](https://github.com/linkedin/cruise-control), which is bundled as part of the Charmed Apache Kafka [snap](https://github.com/canonical/charmed-kafka-snap) and [rock](https://github.com/canonical/charmed-kafka-rock).

At a high level, Cruise Control is made up of the following five components:

- **Workload Monitor** - responsible for the metrics collection from Apache Kafka
- **Analyzer** - generates allocation proposals based on configured [Goals](https://github.com/linkedin/cruise-control?tab=readme-ov-file#goals)
- **Anomaly Detector** - detects failures in brokers, disks, metrics or goals and (optionally) self-heals
- **Webserver** - a REST API for user operations
- **Executor** - issues re-allocation commands to Apache Kafka

### Deploying partition balancer

The Charmed Apache Kafka charm has a configuration option `roles`, which takes a list of possible values.
Different roles can be configured to run on the same machine, or as separate Juju applications.

The two necessary roles for cluster rebalancing are:
- `broker` - running Apache Kafka
- `balancer` - running Cruise Control

> > **Note**: It is recommended to deploy a separate Juju application for running Cruise Control in production environments.

Reviewer: The note blocks bug on Discourse has been fixed. We can use proper note blocks now.
**Suggestion**:
```suggestion
[note]
It is recommended to deploy a separate Juju application for running Cruise Control in production environments.
[/note]
```
